Creating an event
=================

This chapter covers the how create a new event, describing each of the
set up options available in the event creation screen. If you going to
allow online registration for the event, you will also want to read the
*online event registration* chapter. If not, you'll want to read the
*manual event registration* chapter. 

To get started, create a new event by choosing **Events > New Event**
from the menu. (If you can't see the events menu, make sure that you
have enabled the Events component. You can do this in **Administer >
Configure > Global Settings > Enable Components**.) 

Event Information and Settings
------------------------------

The first page you see when creating an event requests basic information
about the event. You can click on any of the blue question marks to
show help for each of the fields. When you see a pencil, clicking on it
will take you to a screen where you can edit the options available.
Note, depending on your permissions, you may not be able to edit these
options and therefore will not see the pencil. 

![image](../img/4.5_new_event.PNG)

**From template** allows you to create an event from a template (see
*Event templates* chapter in this section) rather than creating one from
scratch.

**Event type** allows you to categorise the event.

If you have **CiviCampaign** enabled, you can select a campaign for this
to be a part of (see the *Campaign* section for more details). 

**Roles** distinguish different types of event participants, such as
attendees, speakers and staff. What role should participants be assigned
when they register online for this event? The value placed in this field
will be assigned by default when users register online or when you
import registrations unless you include the field Participant Role with
other values in your CSV import file. The most common value is Attendee.

Do you want users to see a list of participants, and how much
information about the participants do you want to reveal? **Participant
Listings** demonstrate support for an event and can help to generate
interest within your constituent community. Note that the options you
define in this section only *enable* participant listings â€” to display
one, you will need to create a menu item or link to the listing
somewhere on your website. Once you've created the event, the
participant listing link is displayed on the event configuration page.
Refer to the chapter *Event management* for information on participant
listings and other ways to promote your events.

What is your event called? The **Event Title** will appear on event
information pages, registration pages, event listings, and in the Manage
Events administrative page. Be sure to choose a meaningful, well-crafted
title to represent your event.

The next two fields (**Event Summary** and **Complete Description**) let
you describe your event. Both the summary and complete description will
be included on event information pages. Use the rich-text editor
provided for the description field to include photo, images, and
formatted text.

Enter the **Start date/time** and **End date/time** for your event.
These will be included on the event information page and event listings.

You can set a **Maximum number of participants** for each event and
define a message to be displayed when that number is reached.

If you want to display a map showing the event location you can do so
using either Google Maps or Open Street Maps (you will need to configure
your mapping solution through **Administer > System Settings > Mapping
and Geocoding**).

Select the **Public Event** box to include the event in promotional
listings such as RSS feeds, iCal files or feeds, and event listing
pages.

Select **Allow sharing through social media** to include social media
links for sharing this event on the Event Info page, Thank-you page,
Tell-a-Friend page (if enabled), and in event confirmation emails.

Lastly, you have the option of making this event active or inactive. If
you anticipate that it will take some time to complete the configuration
of your event, consider making it inactive until it is complete to
ensure it is not inadvertently listed on the event listing feeds. You
can easily activate the event when you are ready to begin publicizing
it.

After reviewing the details on this page, click **Continue >>** to
create your event and advance to the next step. You can interrupt
configuration on any subsequent page by clicking **Save and Done** and
return later to review and modify any of the settings.

To return to a saved event, navigate to **Events > Manage Events** and
click **Configure** to continue working on the event. 

Event Location
--------------

The next step is to complete the location and contact details for the
event. 

Once you have entered an event location, you can reuse it for subsequent
events by clicking **Use existing location** and selecting it from the
dropdown list. Note that if you choose an existing location and edit it,
it will update that location for all events that use it.

![image](../img/event%20location%20with%20warning.PNG) 

You can also list phone numbers and email addresses on the event
information page if you want to give registrants a way to contact event
organizers directly. If the event is being held off-site from your
organization's primary location, you may also want to provide contact
information for the meeting location.

Fees
----

If the event is free, set the **Paid Event** radio button to **No**,
then click **Save** and skip to Online Registration.

If this is a paid event, click **Yes**. The screen will show the options
available (see the following set of screenshots).

What **Contribution Type** (financial type) will be assigned to paid
registrations for this event? Although the most common value for this
field is simply Event Fee, CiviCRM provides the flexibility to define
multiple Financial Types and assign them to different events as needed.
See *Set-Up* in the *Contributions* section for details.

If you plan to accept credit card payments through the online
registration form, you need to configure a **payment processor** prior
to creating your event. Find more information about this, see *Payment
Processors* in the *Contributions* section. 

Do you want to allow registrants to pay later by mailing in a check,
paying on-site with cash or credit card, or arranging some other payment
method? If so, you can enable the **Pay Later option** and define a
label and payment instructions. If you keep this unchecked, registrants
will be required to pay by credit card.

![EventFeesPayLater](../img/CiviCRM_update-CiviEvent-EventFeesPayLater-en.png "EventFeesPayLater")

**Regular Fees** provide a set of price levels from which the registrant
must select a single level (e.g. an individual registration for $50 or
a family registration for $100). Each fee amount has a label assigned
and you can set a default fee. This approach works well for many events
and is easy to set up. Here's a simple example:

![EventRegFees](../img/CiviCRM_update-CiviEvent-EventRegFees-en.png "EventRegFees")

If your event requires a more complex pricing structure, with more
options or additional add-ons, you may wish to use **price sets** or
**discounts**. For more information about this, see the *Complex event
fees* chapter in this section.

Online registration 
--------------------

Allowing people to register online (self-service) through your web site
offers many benefits. Online registration is convenient for your
constituents and can save staff time and resources. If you do not need
to offer online registration, do not check **Allow Online
Registration** and move onto the next step. If you do want to allow
online registration, please see the *Online event registration* chapter
in this section. 

Scheduled reminders
-------------------

Scheduled reminders can be used to automatically send event registrants
emails at certain times before or after events, for example

-   a week before: remind them that they should check out the conference
    schedule 
-   a day after: ask them to fill in the feedback form
-   Two days before payment is due for a Pending from Pay Later
    registration: warn them that their registration will be cancelled if
    they don't provide payment details in the next 48 hours. 

To set up a scheduled reminder for a specific event, click on the
scheduled reminders tab, which will show you already existing scheduled
reminders for this event (if any) and click on **Add Reminder**. 

![image](../img/scheduled-reminder-events.png)Fill in the details on
this form to send, for example, an email to all registered speakers 3
days before the event start date.  Note that you can limit recipients by
status (registered, attended, etc.) and also by role (speaker, attendee,
volunteer, etc.).  You can either use a template or compose your own
message in the HTML format box. 

![image](../img/scheduled-reminder-events-compose.png)

As well as setting up reminders on an event by event basis, you can also
set them up for specific event types. and add them to specific event
templates.  The idea is basically the same as above, but you can access
this functionality from **Administer > Communications > Scheduled
reminders**. 

Tell-A-Friend
-------------

![image](http://booki.flossmanuals.net/civicrm/http://en.flossmanuals.net/floss/pub/CiviCRM/CiviEvent/)CiviEvent
makes it easy to leverage the social networking power of your committed
constituents by empowering them to quickly and easily share details
about your organization and event with their friends and colleagues. The
final step in the event creation is a page where you can enable
"Tell-A-Friend" capabilities. You can define the text and links to be
included on that page and in the email sent from the tool (see the
following screenshot).

![EventTellFriend](../img/CiviCRM_update-CiviEvent-EventTellFriend-en.png "EventTellFriend")

A "Tell a friend" activity record will be added to a participant's
Activities tab each time she sends mail to her friends. This allows you
to track your most active supporters and engage them further. The people
who are emailed using this feature are also automatically added to
CiviCRM as contacts.

Registration confirmation and receipting
----------------------------------------

You can send automated confirmation and receipt emails to participants
who register for an event, whether they register online are registered
by your staff or volunteers. The content and layout of these emails are
controlled by message templates*.*Both HTML and Text formats are
provided. You can modify or add text to these emails, or add branding
such as a logo to the HTML versions. To set up a from email address from
which to send the confirmation and receipts, see Set-Up in the Email
section.

Navigate to **Administer > Communications > Message Templates** (shown
in the following screenshot) and click the **System Workflow Message**
tab to see the list of messages you can modify. Click **Edit** next to
"Events - Registration Confirmation and Receipt" rows to edit the
content and layout.

![WorkflowMsgTpls](../img/CiviCRM_update-CiviEvent-WorkflowMsgTpls-en.png "WorkflowMsgTpls")


The templates for these messages include both the text shown and
necessary program logic. Use caution when editing so as not to modify
the program logic. Be sure to test the workflow and review the emails
sent after making any changes. If you find that your changes have caused
problems, errors or missing information, you can always revert to the
system default for that workflow.  

